State of the Union Address Franklin D. Roosevelt January 6, 1941

Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, Members of the Seventy-seventh Congress:

I address you, the Members of the Seventy-seventh Congress, at a moment
unprecedented in the history of the Union. I use the word
“unprecedented,” because at no previous time has American security been
as seriously threatened from without as it is today.

Since the permanent formation of our Government under the Constitution
in 1789, most of the periods of crisis in our history have related
solely to our domestic affairs. Fortunately, only one of these—the
four-year War Between the States—ever threatened our national unity.
Today, thank God, one hundred and thirty years of common effort have
placed our nation in a position of unity that it would not have enjoyed
in 1861.

No realistic American can expect from a dictator’s peace international
generosity, or return of true independence, or world disarmament, or
freedom of expression, or freedom of religion—or even good business.

Such a peace would bring no security for us or for our neighbors. “Those
who would give up essential liberty to purchase a little temporary
safety deserve neither liberty nor safety.”

As a nation we may take pride in the fact that we are softhearted; but
we cannot afford to be softheaded.

The experience of the past two years has proved beyond doubt that no
nation can appease the Nazis. No man can tame a tiger into a kitten by
stroking it.

The United States has no right or reason to encourage talk of peace
until the day shall come when there is a clear prospect of a permanent
peace.

Every realist knows that the democratic way of life is at this moment
being directly assailed in every part of the world—assailed either by
arms or by secret spreading of poisonous propaganda by those who seek to
destroy unity and promote discord in nations that are still at peace.

During sixteen long months this assault has blotted out the whole
pattern of democratic life in an appalling number of independent
nations, great and small.

The assailants are still on the march, threatening other nations, great
and small.

Therefore, as your President, performing my constitutional duty to “give
to the Congress information of the state of the Union,” I find it
necessary to report that the future and the safety of our country and of
our democracy are overwhelmingly involved in events far beyond our
borders.

Armed defense of democratic existence is now being gallantly waged in
four continents. If that defense fails, all the population and all the
resources of Europe, Asia, Africa, and Australasia will be dominated by
conquerors.

In times like these it is immature—and, incidentally, untrue—for anybody
to brag that an unprepared America, single-handed and with one hand tied
behind its back, can hold off the whole world.

No realistic American can expect that.

The United States must be strong. We must build the security of America
upon the broad foundations of defense and economic strength.

In the future days, which we seek to make secure, we look forward to a
world founded upon four essential human freedoms.

The first is freedom of speech and expression—everywhere in the world.

The second is freedom of every person to worship God in his own
way—everywhere in the world.

The third is freedom from want—which, translated into world terms, means
economic understandings which will secure to every nation a healthy
peacetime life for its inhabitants—everywhere in the world.

The fourth is freedom from fear—which, translated into world terms,
means a worldwide reduction of armaments to such a point and in such a
thorough fashion that no nation will be in a position to commit an act
of physical aggression against any neighbor—anywhere in the world.

That is no vision of a distant millennium. It is a definite basis for a
kind of world attainable in our own time and generation.

That kind of world is the very antithesis of the so-called new order of
tyranny which the dictators seek to create with the crash of a bomb.

To that new order we oppose the greater conception—the moral order.

A good society is able to face schemes of world domination and foreign
revolutions alike without fear.

Since the beginning of our American history we have been engaged in
change—in a perpetual peaceful revolution—a revolution which goes on
steadily, quietly adjusting itself to changing conditions—without the
concentration camp or the quicklime in the ditch.

The world order which we seek is the cooperation of free countries,
working together in a friendly, civilized society.

This nation has placed its destiny in the hands and heads and hearts of
its millions of free men and women; and its faith in freedom under the
guidance of God.

Freedom means the supremacy of human rights everywhere. Our support goes
to those who struggle to gain those rights and keep them.

Our strength is our unity of purpose.

To that high concept there can be no end save victory.
